[Music]
In this part we will talk about the standard library.
So the standard C++ library
is a collection of functions,
constants, classes, objects and templates,
that extends the C++ language.
It has a lot of parts.
So very common ones are the input/output stream library,
that you have used.
That contains for example "cin", "cout".
The standard template library,
that contains a lot of data types,
like the map- and the vector container and all the others
And then there is the whole C library
and then there are other libraries like string,
new, limits and exception.
In this course we will pick out
some of these library functions, constants, classes and so on
and discuss them in a little bit more detail.
I start with the sequential containers,
because they are very important.
So this should be also a repetition.
So, what is a container?
A container is a type, that holds a collection
of objects.
In the C++ library
each container type is a template
and in order to define a container,
we must specify the type of the elements,
that you want to store in the container.
So classical example: a list, that contains integers.
These library containers are mostly variable sized.
So you can define a vector of double, for example,
and then later on you can add elements
and let it grow.
Now a sequential container is basically a type,
that holds an ordered collection of objects
of a single type.
So you can access the elements
in a sequential container by position.
The example that I choose here is the vector
flexible sized array as said.
Here you can use the positional index,
in order to access the element
and you can also add elements by built-in functions
for example push back or insert.
If you add elements to a vector,
then it can happen that the memory is reallocated.
That means also that you invalidate all iterators,
that work on this vector.
If you add or remove an element in the middle of a vector,
then you also invalidate all iterators
to the elements after the insertion point.
So using a vector for data,
that you want to add flexibly
elements or delete elements at an arbitrary position,
is not very efficient.
So typically a vector has fast access,
but slow addition and deletion of elements
at arbitrary positions.
One operation I want to stress here
is the "emplace_back" or "emplace_front".
What you want to do here is,
you want to construct a new element in a position,
where you have beforehand allocated the memory.
So this is closely related to the allocator class.
In this case if you use "emplace_back",
then the new element is constructed directly
in this space, that is managed by the container.
A classical function is "push_back".
for appending elements
at the back of a vector.
Now when you work with an iterator,
then you should always stick
to the intended semantics, of course.
You should for example prefer "!="
and not ">", if you have loops,
especially with vector.
Many people try to use "<" in a for loop,
but of course this is not general,
because other containers they do not offer a "<",
if they are not an ordered collection.
So you should prefer "!=".
And of course when you use iterators,
then you should have in mind,
that if you change the size of a vector,
then you also invalidate the existing iterators.
There are different kinds of iterators.
So you have for example a constant iterator
and you have also const iterator.
The difference is the first is an iterator,
that is constant and second is an iterator,
that does not allow you to change values
of the elements you get back from the iterator.
Now if you work with a vector,
then you have to know that the size of the vector
is the number of elements in it.
And in addition to that you have also the capacity.
So the capacity of a vector tells you,
how many elements it could hold,
before you have to reallocate memory,
in order to add more elements.
Internally it is implementation-dependent,
how this allocation strategy is done.
So the only requirements are,
that the reserve and the capacity functions are provided.
Now, if you work with containers,
then of course in the design phase of your software,
you have to decide which one you want to use.
Since there are a number of containers available
you should first of all check,
if you want to access your elements randomly,
or one after the other in a certain order.
And then second you should check,
if you want to add or remove elements
and if so, if you want to add or remove elements
only at the beginning at the end,
or also at random positions.
And depending on this, you should then choose
the most efficient container for that case.
If you have a situation where this changes during runtime.
So let's say you have a certain strategy at the beginning,
where you add arbitrary elements
at arbitrary positions to your container,
but once you have your elements,
then you only want to access it arbitrarily
and not always go through all elements,
so you have a position then,
then it could also be useful,
first to use a list, build up the list
and then to copy the list into a vector,
where you can access randomly very efficient.
The next part discusses briefly the generic algorithms.
So what are generic algorithms?
They are basically type dependent algorithms.
The requirements: Basically, we need a way
to traverse the collection.
This is realized by iterators.
We need to be able to know,
when we have reached the end of the collection.
Also realized via "end", so also iterators.
And we need to be able to compare
each element to the value we want.
This requirement is put on the element type.
So the element type has to overload
the comparison operator,
in order to work the generic algorithms
and we need a type, that can refer
to an element's position within the container,
or that can indicate, that the element was not found.
So this is for example "npos".
Classically generic algorithms
never execute container operations,
but they operate solely in terms of iterators
and iterator operations,
in order to be generic.
And when you want to use a generic algorithm,
at first you should look at the container,
because for example for lists there are some operations
provided directly by the container as member functions.
And they are then a little bit faster,
than the generic ones,
because they are specialized for the list.
As an example let's say we want to eliminate
duplicates in a vector of strings
that is called "words".
So how can you do that using generic algorithms?
In step one you use the sort,
here you provide an iterator range,
"words.begin()" "words.end()".
This results now in a sorted "words" vector.
And in step two you reorder the "words",
so that each word appears once
in the front part of the "words" vector
and you return an iterator, one past the unique element
by the "unique" generic algorithm.
You can store in a vector string iterator
the result from unique.
And "unique" again is called just with
an iterator "words.begin()" "words.end()" interval.
And in step three you can then call a member function
from the vector that erases basically all duplicates.
Note here algorithms never directly changed
the size of a container.
So that means if you want to add or remove elements,
then you must use container operations.
One very common task
is to define predicates,
when you work with generic algorithms.
An example is: you want to "find_if",
and the "if" is a predicate, for example,
you want to find in a vector all elements,
that are smaller than some number.
Then you can you define a predicate, or a function,
that says, okay, if it's smaller than the number,
return "true" else return "false".
Typically these predicates are taking one or two arguments.
As a predicate you can then use different kinds
of callable objects.
In general in C++ you have several types
of callable objects besides the standard functions
and the pointer to functions,
that somehow you should not use.
They're quite complex to define
and there are better ways, typically.
There is now the lambda function.
So this is a very elegant way to define
a callable object especially for predicates.
But also specific things,
like if you use the bind function.
objects created by that are also callable objects.
And of course if you have a functors of a class,
that overloads the call operator.
This is also a callable object.
So you can have in principle two callable objects,
that have different types,
but share the same call signature,
so like a function and functor,
they have the same call signature.
In addition to that the standard library provides
the function type within the functional header.
And herein you can store any kind of callable object.
So here you see the examples.
Function takes a template parameter
and in this template parameter
you specify, e.g., the parameter list of the callable object.
Two integers here. And also the return type
of the callable object,
that would be an integer.
The next thing is again iterators.
So there are several types of iterators,
as you might already know.
Here in this figure at the bottom of the page
you see the classical iterator,
where you have the "begin" and the "end".
And then you have also the reverse iterators,
that basically start at the last element
and "r_end" is one before the first element.
So this can be used to traverse
your collection from the end to the beginning.
And then there are additional iterators,
that can not do so general things.
One example is the insert iterator.
This iterator uses a container operation
to insert elements.
And that's his only task basically.
Whenever you use it,
it will insert, like using push_back one element into a container.
It could also print one element to a stream.
And then I want to add
some information about newer parts
of the standard library.
So the first thing I want to mention is the "tuple" type.
"tuple" type is kind of a an extension to the "pair".
"pair" can store two types
and "tuple" can store an arbitrary number of types.
Internally this is realized by a variadic template.
This is sometimes useful.
The next is regular expressions.
Regular expressions are a way to
describe a sequence of characters.
You might know it from other languages
like Perl, or Python, or many others.
Regular expressions
are for example used to find some parts in a text.
You could via regular expressions
easily extract, let's say all email addresses from a text.
In the example you see here,
how you define such a pattern or
regular expression.
In the coding examples later
we will see a more complex example.
Then you have the random numbers.
Before C++11 you only had the "rand" function from C.
This you should not use anymore,
because it's not very flexible
and also the random numbers are not very good
in a statistical sense.
Now the new random number library,
allows you to define
more complex random numbers and you also can control
for example their distribution.
This makes it now possible also to do
serious statistical computations with this library.
The last part of the library, I want to mention,
is the chrono library.
Here you get a flexible collection of types
that track time,
with varying degrees of precision.
Inside the chrono library you have three main types.
First you have clocks,
then you have time points and then you have durations.
These are the three concepts.
In the example here you see you can define a start.
This is from the chrono library the system clock "now()",
so a specific clock.
This is the current time, so to say,
then we define a duration "elapsed_seconds".
This you can just do by subtracting the two time points
and then you have an "end_time",
that you get by chrono system clock "to_time_t".
So this is a quite convenient way,
to use time in your programs
and the especially nice thing is,
that this works also on different operating systems
in the same way.
So this you should definitely use,
if want to implement, e.g.,
performance measurement or timing routines
in your code.
[Music]